.TH "DCANEC" "1" "September, 2014" "v2"
.SH NAME
.PP
dcaenc \- encoder for the DTS Coherent Acoustics audio format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\f[B]dcaenc\f[] input.wav output.dts bitrate
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\f[B]dcaenc\f[] is an open\-source implementation of the DTS Coherent
Acoustics lossy audio codec.
Only the core part of the encoder is implemented, even though the full
specification (ETSI TS 102 114 V1.3.1) is available for download.
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
The dcaenc command line utility converts multichannel wav files to DTS.
The resulting DTS files can be written to an audio CD and played via a
digital connection (SPDIF or HDMI) to a receiver, or, after changing the
endianness, used as sound tracks for a DVD.
Currently there are no options to select 28\-bit encoding or change the
endianness.
This is a bug.
.PP
Usage: \f[B]dcaenc input.wav output.dts bitrate\f[]
.PP
The input wav file should have the same channel order as defined by
SMPTE, i.e.: left, right, center, lfe, surround left, surround right.
.PP
Some destinations require a specific bitrate to be specified.
To create a CD\-compatible DTS file from a multichannel file (that needs
to have the sample rate of 44100 Hz and either 16 or 32 bits per
sample), run:
.PP
\f[B]dcaenc input.wav output.dts 1411200\f[]
.PP
To create a DVD\-compatible track from a multichannel wav file that has
the 48 kHz sample rate:
.PP
\f[B]dcaenc input.wav output.dts 1509000\f[]
.PP
or for a half\-rate output:
.PP
\f[B]dcaenc input.wav output.dts 754500\f[]
.PP
and then byte\-swap the resulting output.dts file.
Mux it with your MPEG2 video track using the "mplex" tool from the
mjpeg\-tools package.
.PP
Known bug: wav files with floating\-point samples are misinterpreted as
containing 32\-bit integer samples.
.SH ALSA Plugin
.PP
The ALSA plugin may be useful for playing multichannel sound from
arbitrary ALSA applications through an SPDIF link.
This is needed because the SPDIF link cannot carry enough bits per
second to transport the raw uncompressed 5.1 audio.
.PP
The "alsa\-plugins" package contains a similar plugin for on\-the\-fly
AC3 encoding.
.PP
The plugin should normally not be used with HDMI connections, because
the HDMI standard defines enough bandwidth so that the uncompressed 5.1
PCM stream fits even at 192 kHz sample rate.
So, attempting to encode that into DTS in the majority of cases is only
a waste of CPU time and sound quality.
There are, however, at least two valid use cases.
.IP "1." 3
Radeon HD 6xxx video cards with open\-source driver do not support more
than two channels of PCM audio over HDMI.
Encoding the output to DTS provides a useful workaround to the lack of
multichannel capability in the driver.
.IP "2." 3
Some soundbars are supposed to get the audio signal from the TV via the
optical cable, while the TV itself is connected to the computer using
HDMI.
.PP
If you know another valid use case, please send an e\-mail to
\f[I]<patrakov@gmail.com>\f[].
.PP
The ALSA plugin should work in real time on any modern CPU.
Here on Intel Core i5 \@ 1.20 GHz (i.e.
in powersaving mode) it eats ~40% of a single core.
.PP
To use the ALSA plugin, add the following line to your
\f[I]$HOME/.asoundrc\f[] file or to \f[I]/etc/asound.conf\f[]:
.PP
\f[B]\f[]
.PP
It will create an additional ALSA device for each of your sound cards
that have an SPDIF output.
The name of the device will be similar to "dca:CARD=Intel,DEV=0", or,
for the default card, simply "dca".
There are also devices that encode to HDMI outputs, they have names like
"dcahdmi:CARD=Intel,DEV=0".
.PP
If you want to encode DTS and send it to something that is not SPDIF or
HDMI, add a snippet similar to the following:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\ pcm.dcacustom\ {
\ \ \ \ \ type\ dca
\ \ \ \ \ slave.pcm\ "custompcm"
\ \ \ \ \ #\ if\ your\ receiver\ requires\ it:
\ \ \ \ \ #\ iec61937\ 1
\ }
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Unlike the AC3 encoder, there is no bitrate configuration.
This is because it does not make sense to have it.
The hard\-coded default (same bitrate as stereo PCM, all bits used)
provides the best possible quality and should work for everyone.
But it doesn\[aq]t work with receivers that require IEC61937\-5 wrapping
of the DTS frames, that\[aq]s why the "iec61937" option exists, which
can be set to 1 for such receivers.
.PP
To direct mplayer output to the default card via the encoder:
.PP
\f[B]mplayer \-channels 6 \-ao alsa:device=dca file.flac\f[]
.PP
It is not possible to use dmix on top of the encoder.
This is a limitation of dmix: it only works on direct hardware devices
providing mmap, and the dca plugin is not a hardware device and provides
(non\-working) mmap only due to what seems to be at least partially an
ALSA bug.
Please use PulseAudio instead.
.PP
Known bug: the ALSA plugin doesn\[aq]t report the supported sample rates
correctly and pretends to support mmap.
Fixing this requires rewriting the plugin from the extplug
infrastructure to ioplug, or talking to ALSA developers.
So you may need to add one of the following flags to mplayer command
line:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\ \-af\ resample=44100
\ \-af\ resample=48000
\f[]
.fi
.SH Use with PulseAudio
.PP
The ALSA plugin can be used with PulseAudio.
To do so, add the following lines to the end of the
\f[I]/usr/share/pulseaudio/alsa\-mixer/profile\-sets/default.conf\f[]
file:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
[Mapping\ iec958\-dts\-surround\-51]
device\-strings\ =\ dca:%f
channel\-map\ =\ front\-left,front\-right,rear\-left,rear\-right,front\-center,lfe
paths\-output\ =\ iec958\-stereo\-output
priority\ =\ 3
direction\ =\ output

[Mapping\ hdmi\-dts\-surround\-51]
device\-strings\ =\ dcahdmi:%f
channel\-map\ =\ front\-left,front\-right,rear\-left,rear\-right,front\-center,lfe
paths\-output\ =\ hdmi\-output\-0
priority\ =\ 1
direction\ =\ output
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Newer and/or patched versions of PulseAudio use the
\f[I]/usr/share/pulseaudio/alsa\-mixer/profile\-sets/extra\-hdmi.conf\f[]
file instead for Intel and NVidia sound cards.
If that file exists, add the above lines there, too, adjusting if needed
for multiple HDMI outputs.
.PP
Note that the iec958\-dts\-surround\-51 part of the above is already
provided by PulseAudio 3.0 or later.
.PP
After restarting PulseAudio, it will see additional output profiles
having "DTS" in their names and will allow you to select them in the
volume control application such as pavucontrol or
gnome\-volume\-control.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
.PP
The author has an LG 47LM640T TV that can decode DTS on HDMI inputs.
It works.
He also tests the encoder by decoding its output with ffmpeg, libdca or
ArcSoft DTS decoder (the same engine as used in WinDVD).
.PP
The ALSA plugin has been tested and found to work with the following
receivers by other people:
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\ Logitech\ Z5500
\ JVC\ TH\-A25
\ Samsung\ HT\-Z310
\ Sony\ STR\-DB780
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Some receivers (including JVC TH\-A25 and Sony STR\-DB780) mute their
outputs when receiving full 32\-bit DTS stream (as generated by the ALSA
plugin) over SPDIF with AES0=6 (the default for the "dca" and "dcahdmi"
families of ALSA devices).
To overcome this problem, add the following line to the end of .asoundrc
:
.PP
\f[B]defaults.pcm.dca.aes0 0x04\f[]
.PP
However, it can cause your receiver to unmute its output even if it does
not support DTS streams or does not detect them reliably.
This will result in very loud hiss that can damage the loudspeakers.
So try this setting with the lowest possible volume, and this is why it
is not the default.
.PP
Similar settings exist for AES1, AES2 and AES3 SPDIF parameters.
.PP
Some other receivers (including the LG 47LM640T TV) need not raw DTS
frames, but DTS frames wrapped according to IEC61937\-5, and either mute
the output or produce loud hiss otherwise.
For such receivers, add the following line to the end of .asoundrc:
.PP
\f[B]defaults.pcm.dca.iec61937 1\f[]
.PP
This could not be made the default, because other receivers (such as
Sony STR\-DB780) reject DTS frames wrapped into IEC61937\-5.
.SH QUALITY
.PP
There are debates on the Internet about the relative quality of AC3 vs
DTS.
AC3 uses more advanced compression algorithms, DTS allows for higher bit
rates.
There were no blind tests comparing the output of the encoder with
anything else.
However, this encoder uses only the most basic compression techniques
defined in the DTS specification, and thus cannot win any comparison
with commercial DTS encoders.
Still, at 754 kbps, the internal psychoacoustical model considers the
distortions to be just below the threshold of detection by human ears.
.SH BUGS
.PP
short (< 10 seconds) flac sample that demonstrates the problem, and a
patch that fixes it.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
\f[B]libdcaenc\f[](3)
.PP
The project page is at \f[I]http://aepatrakov.narod.ru/dcaenc/\f[]
.PP
The latest code can be obtained from git: \f[B]git clone
git://gitorious.org/dtsenc/dtsenc.git\f[]
.SH THANKS
.PP
The following people helped me to test the encoder (including the
versions that did not work):
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
\ Arun\ Raghavan
\ Colin\ Guthrie
\ Mikhail\ Elovskikh
\ cryptonymous\ from\ the\ linux.org.ru\ forum
\ rulet\ from\ the\ linux.org.ru\ forum
\ Steven\ Newbury
\f[]
.fi
.PP
The following people contributed useful information: Adam Thomas\-Murphy
.PP
The following people reported bugs: LoRd_MuldeR from
\f[I]https://gitorious.org/~mulder\f[]
.SH AUTHORS
Alexander E. Patrakov <patrakov@gmail.com>.
